The Swedish Sea Rescue Society (SSRS), responsible for 90\% of sea rescue in Sweden, are running a project with Chalmers, Infotiv, Airpelago and RISE called Eyes-on-Scene (EOS), investigating the use of drones to provide early imagery of a maritime incident to rescue personnell on their way to the scene. 

Thus far in the project, a fixed-wing drone along with mission control software has been developed, and the drone is able to fly after waypoints while providing video through the gimbal-mounted camera. The drone has a 4G modem, allowing it to be operated beyond visual line-of-sight (BVLOS). 

With the current software, the SSRS do not have a way to manually control the direction of the camera, and wanted direct control with either a joystick or the arrow keys. The SSRS was also interested in investigating if the manual controls were suitable with the delay introduced by the mobile connection.

In this thesis work, a gimbal control interface has been developed with the aim of acheiving manual control of the camera while also studying the effects of latency on the operator's experience. Two experiments have been carried out: one user study, evaluating quantative and qualitative effects of latency on a camera operator, and one field test, where the gimbal control software was tested during a flight over the Gothenburg archipelago.

In the user study, the user was given a task to perform provided a joystick and a video feed from the drone camera. Five trials with simulated latencies were performed per subject. The results of the study indicate that the relationship between latency and task performance might not be linear, and that an equal amount of delay increase can have different effects on operator experience at different levels of latency.

In the second experiment, the field test, the software was successfully integrated with the in-flight systems and a test flight was made over the Gothenburg Archipelago. The manual controls using a joystick were deemed suitable, although delay and rapid movements of the drone could introduce difficulty.